Added post about importance of code standards. (#1)
LinioIT/linioit.github.io: _posts/2019-02-14-importance-of-code-standards.md

---
layout: post
title: "Importance of code standards"
date: 2019-02-14 18:07:00 -0500

> categories: programming

Reviewer: bump

> authors: "sagrario_meneses"

Reviewer: bump

lang: en
---
Importance of code standards
============================

> Standards are constantly present in our lives, they are important to maintain order in things, software engineering is not the exception, code standards are necessary to develop systems with quality.

Reviewer 2: I suggest this:

`
Standards are constantly present in our lives, they are important to maintain order in things. Software engineering is not the exception and code standards are necessary to develop systems with quality.
`

For companies the quality of their digital applications represents growth and that is something that Linio knows.

> What are coding standards?

Reviewer: Also it should be `code` not `coding` because the title uses `code` not `coding`.

> What are the coding standards?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
What are coding standards?
```

> ----------------------------------

Reviewer 4: Being picky: shouldn't the `-` stop at the last character of the title?

> They are a series of rules defined for a programming language or a specific programming style. Code standards ensure that developers who contribute in a project follow certain guidelines when writing code, that gives, as a result, a consistent product that is easy to read and maintain.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
They are a series of rules defined for a programming language or a specific programming style. Code standards ensure that developers who contribute to a project follow certain guidelines when writing code, which results in a consistent product that is easy to read and maintain.
```

History
-------

> The use of standards is very important in the quality of software, however, keeping all projects in perfect compliance with established standards is not an easy task, it requires a great effort and constancy on the part of the development team. It is very common in new companies to start the development of a project without having established standards.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The use of standards is very important in the quality of software, however, keeping all projects in perfect compliance with established standards is not an easy task. It requires great effort and constancy on the part of the development team. It is very common in new companies to start the development of a project without having established standards.
```

> The use of standards is very important in the quality of software, however, keeping all projects in perfect compliance with established standards is not an easy task. It requires great effort and constancy on the part of the development team. It is very common in new companies to start the development of a project without having established standards.

Reviewer: `constancy` should be `consistency`

Author: 🤔 but here I use `constancy` as synonymous of perseverance or persistence. I mean just if the team keep improve and implement this, then should archive the goal.

Reviewer: Ah. I thought it was a typo. `constancy` isn't a very common word.

Author: What word is better to express this?

Reviewer: `consistency` is a synonym, so I would use that.

> The use of standards is very important in the quality of software, however, keeping all projects in perfect compliance with established standards is not an easy task. It requires great effort and constancy on the part of the development team. It is very common in new companies to start the development of a project without having established standards.

Reviewer: Use `engineering` instead of `development` when talking about people/teams.

> The use of standards is very important in the quality of software, however, keeping all projects in perfect compliance with established standards is not an easy task. It requires great effort and constancy on the part of the development team. It is very common in new companies to start the development of a project without having established standards.

Reviewer: Is it still common for new companies to start development of a new project without standards? I feel like this may no longer be the case as PSR-1/2 are pretty prevalent, and other languages have their own tooling/standards.

I'm not saying it isn't still common, this is to bring up a discussion point.

Author: Yeah, you might be right, but at least here in MX is very common that some startups start without thinking about this 🤔 surely in the USA is less common, do you think I should paraphrase this like "In LATAM. . ." or maybe is just an impression than me and some friends have. . .

Reviewer: Since this blog isn't targeting people only in LATM, I would rephrase it somehow. Maybe `While more and more companies have adopted standards, there are still those that begin development of new projects without them.` or something of the sort.

> That happened in Linio. At first, we did not have standards and it was common that developers wrote code in their own way, resulting in a project difficult to understand and difficult to maintain. I still remember the hours we spent debugging a problem before being even close to where it might have originated.

Reviewer 5: "That happened in the early days of Linio"

> Something like that happened in Linio, at first we did not have standards and it was common that developers wrote code in their own way, resulting in a project difficult to understand and difficult to maintain, I still remember the hours we spent debugging a problem before being even close to where it might have originated.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
That happened in Linio. At first, we did not have standards and it was common that developers wrote code in their own way, resulting in a project difficult to understand and difficult to maintain. I still remember the hours we spent debugging a problem before being even close to where it might have originated.
```

> That happened in the early days of Linio. At first, we did not have standards and it was common that developers wrote code in their own way, resulting in a project difficult to understand and difficult to maintain. I still remember the hours we spent debugging a problem before being even close to where it might have originated.

Reviewer: What happened in the early days of Linio? I would instead write this as something like `In the early days at Linio, we too did not have an established code standard.`

> That happened in the early days of Linio. At first, we did not have standards and it was common that developers wrote code in their own way, resulting in a project difficult to understand and difficult to maintain. I still remember the hours we spent debugging a problem before being even close to where it might have originated.

Reviewer: I would break up the sentence `At first...`. It's a long sentence, and splitting it will help it read a little better in my opinion. Also, this will allow you to embellish this a little bit.

> That happened in the early days of Linio. At first, we did not have standards and it was common that developers wrote code in their own way, resulting in a project difficult to understand and difficult to maintain. I still remember the hours we spent debugging a problem before being even close to where it might have originated.

Reviewer: How do code standards have anything to do with debugging a problem as you mentioned? I'm actually a bit confused here as to what you mean, so we should probably explain that a bit more.

> “Slow and steady wins the race.” Linio's migration to standard practices has been progressive. It was not a single day. We began to adopt the standards in new projects and step by step an adequate level in each change that was sent to our repositories was demanded. In the beginning, it was difficult to adapt between not having rules established for the revision of code and being very aware of these rules for getting the approval for our pull requests.

Reviewer 5: "It did not happen overnight" instead of "It was not a single day"

> “Slow and steady wins the race.” Linio's migration to good practices has been progressive, it was not a single day, it began to be adopted in the new projects and step by step an adequate level in each change that was sent to our repositories was demanded, at the beginning was difficult to adapt between not having rules established for the revision of code and being very aware of these rules for getting the approval for our pull requests.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
“Slow and steady wins the race.” Linio's migration to standard practices has been progressive. It was not a single day. We began to adopt the standards in new projects and step by step an adequate level in each change that was sent to our repositories was demanded. In the beginning, it was difficult to adapt between not having rules established for the revision of code and being very aware of these rules for getting the approval for our pull requests.
```

Reviewer 3: > and step by step an adequate level in each change that was sent to our repositories was demanded

This sound weird to me. I suggest trimming it down a bit and using the word "refactor" to make it more clear. Something like:

> and gradually, as needed, small refactors trickled down to our legacy repositories.

> “Slow and steady wins the race.” Linio's migration to standard practices has been progressive. It did not happen overnight. We began to adopt the standards in new projects and step by step an adequate level in each change that was sent to our repositories was demanded. In the beginning, it was difficult to adapt between not having rules established for the revision of code and being very aware of these rules for getting the approval for our pull requests.

Reviewer 5: This sentence is a bit hard to understand in my opinion, maybe we should rephrase it: "We began to adopt the standards in new projects and step by step an adequate level in each change that was sent to our repositories was demanded."

> “Slow and steady wins the race.” Linio's migration to standard practices has been progressive. It did not happen overnight. We began to adopt the standards in new projects and step by step an adequate level in each change that was sent to our repositories was demanded. In the beginning, it was difficult to adapt between not having rules established for the revision of code and being very aware of these rules for getting the approval for our pull requests.

Reviewer: A different quote here that may make more sense is `Rome wasn't built in a day`. While we did slowly adopt standards, it isn't a race in any way, and therefore I'm not sure the quote makes the most sense in this particular case.

> “Slow and steady wins the race.” Linio's migration to standard practices has been progressive. It did not happen overnight. We began to adopt the standards in new projects and step by step an adequate level in each change that was sent to our repositories was demanded. In the beginning, it was difficult to adapt between not having rules established for the revision of code and being very aware of these rules for getting the approval for our pull requests.

Reviewer: I don't think the separate of the first two sentences (after the quote) reads really well. I would join the two.

> “Slow and steady wins the race.” Linio's migration to standard practices has been progressive. It did not happen overnight. We began to adopt the standards in new projects and step by step an adequate level in each change that was sent to our repositories was demanded. In the beginning, it was difficult to adapt between not having rules established for the revision of code and being very aware of these rules for getting the approval for our pull requests.

Reviewer: `adopt the standards` should probably read `adopt standards`. We haven't specified which standards, so this makes the most sense.

> “Slow and steady wins the race.” Linio's migration to standard practices has been progressive. It did not happen overnight. We began to adopt the standards in new projects and step by step an adequate level in each change that was sent to our repositories was demanded. In the beginning, it was difficult to adapt between not having rules established for the revision of code and being very aware of these rules for getting the approval for our pull requests.

Reviewer: You definitely need some periods in the `We began to adopt the standards` sentence.

> “Slow and steady wins the race.” Linio's migration to standard practices has been progressive. It did not happen overnight. We began to adopt the standards in new projects and step by step an adequate level in each change that was sent to our repositories was demanded. In the beginning, it was difficult to adapt between not having rules established for the revision of code and being very aware of these rules for getting the approval for our pull requests.

Reviewer: Use a comma before the `and` in the sentence about establishing rules. https://www.grammarly.com/blog/what-is-the-oxford-comma-and-why-do-people-care-so-much-about-it/

> “Slow and steady wins the race.” Linio's migration to standard practices has been progressive. It did not happen overnight. We began to adopt the standards in new projects and step by step an adequate level in each change that was sent to our repositories was demanded. In the beginning, it was difficult to adapt between not having rules established for the revision of code and being very aware of these rules for getting the approval for our pull requests.

Reviewer: I really am not sure what you mean by the last sentence here. Can you explain it better?

> Nowadays we have our own set of standards, also some automated processes, such as code style; with the help of a script, we can detect lines of code that do not match our standards before trying to push them to the project. There are still many things to improve and standards to add, it is constant work and we continue working on it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Nowadays we have our own set of standards, and a commit-hook to enforce them. We use PHP CS Fixer to detect lines of code that do not match our standards before trying to push them to the project. There are still many things to improve and standards to add, it is constant work as we strive to improve our codebase.
```

Reviewer 3: I suggest being a little more specific to offer our solution that is publicly available to really connect with the reader.

> Nowadays we have our own set of standards, and commit-hooks to enforce them. For our PHP codebases, we use PHP CS Fixer to detect lines of code that do not match our standards before trying to push them to the project. There are still many things to improve and standards to add, it is constant work as we strive to improve our codebase.

Reviewer: There should be a comma after `Nowadays`.

> Nowadays we have our own set of standards, and commit-hooks to enforce them. For our PHP codebases, we use PHP CS Fixer to detect lines of code that do not match our standards before trying to push them to the project. There are still many things to improve and standards to add, it is constant work as we strive to improve our codebase.

Reviewer: We actually don't have commit-hooks in most cases. Only where prettier is concerned, but that isn't most of our code. I wouldn't mention that. Instead, I would mention CI where we check for code style issues.

> Nowadays we have our own set of standards, and commit-hooks to enforce them. For our PHP codebases, we use PHP CS Fixer to detect lines of code that do not match our standards before trying to push them to the project. There are still many things to improve and standards to add, it is constant work as we strive to improve our codebase.

Reviewer: I wouldn't mention that we have our own set of standards. Instead, we adopt the official standards, or community standards. While we have some additions to them, adopting our own set of standards isn't entirely correct, and actually sounds worse. People don't want company specific standards.

> Nowadays we have our own set of standards, and commit-hooks to enforce them. For our PHP codebases, we use PHP CS Fixer to detect lines of code that do not match our standards before trying to push them to the project. There are still many things to improve and standards to add, it is constant work as we strive to improve our codebase.

Reviewer: I would write it as `For our PHP code, we utilize php-cs-fixer to automatically format our code, rather than having engineers handle it by hand.` or something of the sort. This also goes well with the mentioning of CI, rather than talking about formatting before pushing.

Also, you don't push anything to the project, you push changes to the repository.

> Nowadays we have our own set of standards, and commit-hooks to enforce them. For our PHP codebases, we use PHP CS Fixer to detect lines of code that do not match our standards before trying to push them to the project. There are still many things to improve and standards to add, it is constant work as we strive to improve our codebase.

Reviewer: Again, avoid `things` if you can.

> Nowadays we have our own set of standards, and commit-hooks to enforce them. For our PHP codebases, we use PHP CS Fixer to detect lines of code that do not match our standards before trying to push them to the project. There are still many things to improve and standards to add, it is constant work as we strive to improve our codebase.

Reviewer: Why do we need more standards? Be a bit more clear as to what you may be referring to. Otherwise it looks like we are still in the process of adopting standards, when in reality, we generally have standards for every language that we write in.

> Nowadays we have our own set of standards, and commit-hooks to enforce them. For our PHP codebases, we use PHP CS Fixer to detect lines of code that do not match our standards before trying to push them to the project. There are still many things to improve and standards to add, it is constant work as we strive to improve our codebase.

Reviewer: The `it is constant work` part doesn't sound good to me. Can you find another way to write that sentence?

> How do I start the application of code standards in my projects?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
How to introduce code standards to legacy projects
```

----------------------------------------------------------------

> Not all companies use the same tools in their development and it is very complicated to find the perfect standard that matches our specific needs, it is a good start to achieve quality creating your own standards repository.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Not all companies use the same tools in their development and it can be complicated to find the best standards that fit with your team and codebase. But a good start to achieving quality starts with documenting the standards agreed on. I suggest creating a Standards Repository that your team can continuously reference, review, and update.
```

Considerations:
---------------

> 1. Base yourself on official standards of the tools used in each project.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Use the official standards of the tools used in each project as the base.
```

> 2. To attain an easy-to-read code it is necessary to pay attention to the style of it; code segments, correct use of indentation, length of lines and spaces between them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. To improve code readability, pay attention to code styles like code segments, indentation, length of lines, and line spacing.
```

3. Naming variables, functions etc.

4. Establish limits in complexity or length of functions.

> And most importantly, do not stop at the application of these rules, do not increase the technical debt in the projects, maybe today you have a very large project in which standards have never been applied and it seems a waste of time to start to do it, but it is a worthwhile investment to build a quality product and also an engineering team with quality. If the implementation of these standards starts to be a real headache, it is necessary to consider a complete refactoring of your system. "Divide and conquer", it is recommended to start module by module.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
And most importantly, do not stop at the application of these rules, do not increase the technical debt in the projects. Maybe today you have a very large project in which standards have never been applied and it seems a waste of time to start to do it, but it is a worthwhile investment to build a quality product and also an engineering team with quality. If the implementation of these standards starts to be a real headache, it is necessary to consider a complete refactoring of your system. "Divide and conquer", it is recommended to start module by module.
```

> And most importantly, do not stop at the application of these rules, do not increase the technical debt in the projects, maybe today you have a very large project in which standards have never been applied and it seems a waste of time to start to do it, but it is a worthwhile investment to build a quality product and also an engineering team with quality. If the implementation of these standards starts to be a real headache, it is necessary to consider a complete refactoring of your system. "Divide and conquer", it is recommended to start module by module.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
And most importantly, do not stop at the application of these rules, do not increase the technical debt in the projects. Maybe today you have a very large project in which standards have never been applied and it seems a waste of time to start to do it, but it is a worthwhile investment to build a quality product and also an engineering team with quality. If the implementation of these standards starts to be a real headache, it is necessary to consider a complete refactoring of your system. "Divide and conquer", it is recommended to start module by module.
```

Reviewer 3: This one isn't showing my changes easily. So I'm just pointing out that this was a simple change
`projects, maybe` -> `projects. Maybe` on the second line.

> Advantages of the application of standards:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Advantages of having code standards:
```

-------------------------------------------

1. Early error detection: When trying to comply with the standards we established, it has been easier to detect possible errors in code reviews, preventing these problems from reaching production.

2. Reduction of complexity: Complying with the rules about code style helps build cleaner code, allowing us to easily detect opportunities to simplify our functions.

3. Easy to read code: Respecting the standards in our projects has allowed new team members to easily adapt to the way of work and better understand the code in the repositories.

> 4. Reusable code: We have code segments that can be consumed by more than one service, thanks to the use of good practices, making the repetition of code less frequent.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. Reusable code:  Thanks to the use of good practices, we have code segments that can be consumed by more than one service, making the repetition of code less frequent.
```

    
Recommended clean code principles:
----------------------------------

It is a good strategy to familiarize the team with the principles of clean code, below are some of the principles that inspired us to create our standards and to seek quality in our developments.

1. DRY - Do Not Repeat Yourself.

> 2. YAGNI - You Are Not Gonna Need It.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. YAGNI - You Aren't Gonna Need It.
```

3. KISS - Keep It Simple, Stupid.
4. SOLID

     S - Single-Responsibility Principle.
     
     O - Open-Closed Principle.
     
     L - Liskov Substitution Principle.
     
     I - Interface Segregation Principle.
     
     D - Dependency Inversion Principle.

Conclusion:
-----------
The implementation of standards in Linio resulted in:

* A reduction between 60 and 80% of incidents.
* Decrease in the number of hotfix deployments.
* A significant improvement in the quality of the development team.

> As we can see the definition and use of standards provides many benefits. In my experience, I enjoy my work more now, since we have a focus on code quality, than before, when there were no established rules, and this has been thanks to the work of all engineers in the team, it is about aiming all together at the same goal.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As we can see the definition and use of standards provides many benefits. Since Linio's focus on code quality and implementing standards, I enjoy my work more than before, when there were no established rules. This has been thanks to the work of all engineers on the team, all together aiming for the same goal.
```

---
layout: post

> title: "Importance of Code Standards."

Reviewer: Don't use a `.` in the title.

date: 2019-02-14 18:07:00 -0500
categories: programming
authors: "sagrario_meneses"
lang: en
---

> Importance of Code Standards.

Reviewer: Don't use a `.` in the title.
